Contributions of xboard and WinBoard authors by file
$Id: AUTHORS,v 1.1 2003/11/02 04:42:06 mann Exp $

0. Files covered

The first group are included in the xboard distribution.  The second
group are included in the WinBoard source distribution but not in the
xboard distribution.  All are part of the joint xboard/WinBoard source
base and are covered by the same copyrights and licensing terms.

FAQ.html
backend.c
backend.h
backendz.h
bitmaps
childio.c
childio.h
cmail.in
cmail.man
comment.in
common.h
config.h.in
configure.in
engine-intf.txt
frontend.h
gamelist.c
ics-parsing.txt
lists.c
lists.h
moves.c
moves.h
parser.h
parser.l
pgntags.c
xboard.c
xboard.h
xboard.man
xboard.texi
xedittags.c
xedittags.h
xgamelist.c
xgamelist.h
zic2xpm.c
zic2xpm.man
zippy.README
zippy.c
zippy.h

winboard.rtf (compiles to winboard.hlp)
config.h
defaults.h
resource.h
wedittags.c
wedittags.h
wgamelist.c
wgamelist.h
winboard.c
winboard.h
winboard.rc

bitmaps/*
bitmaps.xchess/*

1. Wayne Christopher

Wrote from scratch (I believe) bitmaps.xchess/*80*.bm.  Other bitmaps
in the bitmaps.xchess directory were derived from these by shrinking
and some hand-tuning.  By default these bitmaps are no longer used.
Their copyright status is unclear.

2. Chris Sears and Dan Sears

Wrote from scratch parser.l, xboard.c, xboard.h, xboard.man.  Parts
(sometimes small) of these files were later moved by Tim Mann to
backend.c, backend.h, childio.c, common.h, frontend.h, and parser.h.

Chris and Dan's original work is copyrighted by Digital Equipment
Corporation with licensing terms similar to what the X Consortium uses
(see the file COPYRIGHT).  All the work listed below is copyrighted by
the Free Software Foundation and covered by the GPL (see the files
COPYRIGHT and COPYING).

3. Tim Mann <tim@tim-mann.org>

Wrote from scratch FAQ.html, backendz.h, childio.h, comment.in,
config.h.in, configure.in, engine-intf.txt, ics-parsing.txt, moves.c,
moves.h, pgntags.c (split from backend.c by Jochen Wiedmann),
xedittags.c, xedittags.h, xgamelist.c, xgamelist.h, zippy.README,
zippy.c, zippy.h, winboard.rtf, config.h, defaults.h, resource.h,
wedittags.c, wedittags.h, wgamelist.c, wgamelist.h, winboard.c,
winboard.h, winboard.rc.

Major additions and changes to nearly all other files listed in
section 0.

4. John Chanak

Addition to xboard.c, mostly later moved into backend.c.

5. Evan Welsh <Evan.Welsh@msdw.com>

Wrote from scratch cmail.in and cmail.man.  Additions to backend.c and
xboard.c.

6. Elmar Bartel <bartel@informatik.tu-muenchen.de>

Wrote from scratch the Metafont code from which bitmaps/* were
generated.  The Metafont code itself is not included in the package.

7. Jochen Wiedmann

Wrote from scratch gamelist.c, lists.c, lists.h.  Wrote xboard.texi,
mostly based on xboard.man and cmail.man.  Minor additions to backend.c.

8. Frank McIngvale <frankm@hiwaay.net>

Wrote from scratch zic2xpm.c and zic2xpm.man.  Additions to backend.c,
xboard.c, and xboard.man.

9. Hugh Fisher <Hugh.Fisher@cs.anu.edu.au>

Additions to backend.c and xboard.c.
