** Announcing the release of XBoard and WinBoard, version 4.2.7 **

XBoard is a graphical chessboard for the X Window System that can
serve as a user interface for GNU Chess, Crafty, and other chess
engines, for the Internet Chess Servers, and for electronic mail
correspondence chess.  XBoard can also be used by itself.  It can read
and write game files in PGN (portable game notation).

WinBoard is a similar program for 32-bit Microsoft Windows.  It
includes all the major features of XBoard except email correspondence
chess.

A new release of both XBoard and WinBoard is now available.  Version
4.2.7 corrects about two dozen bugs in the 4.2.6 release.  See the
ChangeLog for a list.  In addition, WinBoard 4.2.7 comes bundled with
GNU Chess 5.07 instead of the old 5.02+ version.  The XBoard and
WinBoard source code trees have been merged, so the xboard download
now contains the complete source for both.

The various larger contributions that people have submitted since the
4.2.6 release are not yet included in 4.2.7.  The source code for
these contributions is now available, however (see
http://www.tim-mann.org/extensions.html), and we plan to include most
of them in a future release once the contributors complete necessary
copyright assignment paperwork.

You can get both XBoard and WinBoard from either our new Savannah
project pages or their existing pages on Tim Mann's web site:

- https://savannah.gnu.org/projects/xboard/
- http://www.tim-mann.org/chess.html

Most of the known bugs and deficiencies in previous versions have
*not* been addressed in this release.  It is not necessary to report
your favorite bug again if you have reported it before, unless the
ChangeLog erroneously says it has been fixed.  Most known bugs,
deficiencies, and suggestions received are now listed in the ToDo
file.  If you find a bug not listed there, please report it in the bug
tracker at https://savannah.gnu.org/projects/xboard/ or by email to 
bug-xboard [AT] tim-mann.org.
